Autonomy and new technologies
As stated in the previous section, the concept of autonomy has been one of the most
researched areas in the field of second/foreign language learning and teaching over the
last few decades. It should be noted, however, that the field of learner autonomy
started to be influenced by technology in the mid-1990s as a result of the growing
influence of the internet on almost every sphere of our life (including second/foreign
language education) and the opportunities for online collaboration and communication
(Reinders & White, 2016). As stated by Benson and Chik (2010), the latest generations
of new technologies, particularly those encompassing the internet, user-generated Web
content and mobility, seem to be having a bearing on the way autonomous language
learning develops. Perhaps, one of the most important benefits of implementing new
technologies into language learning is the fact that they provide occasions for language
learners who do not have direct access to the target language. This is because the use
of new technologies, including mobile technology, allow them to “bypass classrooms and
go directly to target language texts and users through the internet and social media”
(Benson, 2011, p. 17).
When it comes to the use of mobile technology, and, in particular, smartphones and
tablet computers, for learning a foreign or second language, they can assist language
learners with their learning endeavors by granting access to numerous language
resources whenever and wherever such learners need them and/or they happen to be
(Jones, 2015). In Jones’s opinion, such language involvement might comprise, for
instance, the use of chunks of spare time for language practice, searching for target
language vocabulary in relevant contexts or interactions on social media (Jones, 2015).
Furthermore, by having a mobile device a language learner has the opportunity to take
control of his or her learning, direct it and engage in language activities that meet his or
her individual needs and goals (Kukulska-Hulme, Traxler & Pettit, 2007; Pettit &
Kukulska-Hulme 2007).
Given the importance attached to new technologies, and, in particular the potential role
of mobile devices in autonomous language learning, the terms mobile
learning and mobile devices (MobDs) need first to be explained. As for mobile learning,
no single agreed-upon definition of the term exists in the literature (Oz, 2015). This is
because some researchers define mobile learning as an extension of e-learning built
upon mobile devices whereas some other researchers understand it as learning that
happens anywhere and anytime (cf. Oz, 2015). As far as mobile devices are concerned,
they can be defined as “any device that is small, autonomous and unobtrusive enough
to accompany us in every moment and can be used for educational purposes”
(Trifanova Knapp, Ronchetti & Gamper, 2004, p. 3) or as “hand held electronic devices
that can be comfortably carried around in a pocket or bag, including MP3 players, digital
recorders, e-readers, tablets, and smartphones” (Kukulska-Hulme, Norris & Donohue,
2015, p. 39).
A lot of studies concerning the use of mobile technology and mobile devices in language
learning have been published. The findings of these studies concentrated on, for
example, language learners’ views on the use of mobile devices in language instruction
(e.g. Oz, 2015), students’ attitudes towards using mobile phones as instructional tools
for foreign language learning (e.g. Cakir, 2015), profiling mobile language learners (e.g.
Byrne & Diem, 2014), their effect on learning a foreign/second language (e.g. Nah,
White & Sussex, 2008; Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009; Zhang, Song & Burston, 2011),
distance language learning (e.g. Demouy, Jones, Kan, Kukulska-Hulme & Eardley,
2016), informal language learning practices (Reinders & Cho, 2011; Jones, 2015),
learners’ use of mobile devices for learning a foreign language (Stockwell, 2007;
Dashtestani, 2015) and autonomy in language learning (e.g. Díaz-Vera, 2012; Djoub,
2015). In addition to this, researchers investigated a number of applications of mobile
devices and presented both benefits and drawbacks of the usage of mobile technologies
(e.g. Miangah & Nezarat, 2012), discussed the use of mobile devices in supporting
social contacts and collaborative learning (e.g. Kukulska-Hulme & Shield, 2008) and
offered guidelines related to the implementation of mobile learning into second/foreign
language instruction (e.g. Kukulska-Hulme et al., 2015).